---
layout: post
title:  "Can you be smart on your own"
date:   2021-07-08 13:04:00 +0000
categories: Intelligence Complexity
---

Listening to [[Santa Fe Institute]] [[Complexity]] [[Podcast]] with [[Melanie Mitchell]], I realized that my [[Question]] on whether [emergence]([[Emergent Behavior]]) of [[Intelligence]] is only possible in group creatures is actually a well-known [[Concept]], called [[Social Intelligence]]. In short, if there is only 1 creature in a species, there will be no intelligence, and that creature will only exhibit [[Perception]] ability. If there are multiple creatures in a species which interact to each other, then each creature will develop high-level intelligence.

> [Melanie]([[Melanie Mitchell]]):  Yeah, I mean, I think social intelligence is very understudied in AI. Collective intelligence, this the kind of things that people are looking at here at SFI is not mainstream in AI at all. Most AI systems are trying to get a computer to do a particular task, you know, sort of recognize faces or transcribe spoken language or translate between two languages. But they're not trying to model how we might build models of each other, and use those to interact, to maybe improve our status in the society. So I think that's something that AI is going to need to grapple with, especially when, for example, we have self driving cars that are interacting in our society. They're interacting with pedestrians, they're interacting with other vehicles, they're interacting with, with animals and other kinds of things that are out there in the world. And it's going to involve something quite different from these narrow tasks that AI has been so good at to date.

[[Mai Ly]] expressed the idea that a single creature capable of self-evolving and self-changing could develop intelligence as it interacts with the environment. This is true, and actually this is the major thinking about [[Intelligence]], that it could emerge within a single creature. The general idea is that intelligence is a set of tools which creature develops to upgrade itself for better [[Survivability]] and exploitation of the environment. To do that, the creature develops sensors ([[Sensation]]) to understand the environments, and world representation ([[Perception]]) for even better prediction of the future states of the environment. Higher intelligence skills, such as reasoning and planning, will be developed on top of theses low-level skills. A good video reflects this line of thinking is [[Kurzgesagt]] [What is Intelligence? Where does it begin?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ck4RGeoHFko).

However, the fact that the idea of "a single self-evolving creature could develop intelligence and enhance its own intelligence" makes sense makes me want to ask a what if question. Is this really true? What if higher intelligence, or even low-level intelligence itself, cannot emerge in a single self-evolving creature as any other adaptation skills (like growing thick skin, flying, breathing fire), but actually a specific [[Emergent Behavior]] only in social group creatures. Why so, I don't know, but I might conjecture that social creatures have to communicate in some way, and this need to process and understand signals from other creatures spurs the development of intelligence. Eventually, we might say that ultimate purpose of any creature is [[Survivability]], which might be achieved through adaptation or having intelligence. The former option could be more preferable in lone-wolf "self-evolving creature", as it is more impactful to its survivability. The second option might be more likely in "social group creatures" as the creatures pass [[Information]] among them, which necessarily requires ability of encoding/compression of real life events into abstract concepts, communicating these concepts, and decoding received concepts. Therefore, this focus on information processing and passing directs the development of the species toward intelligence rather than adaptation. Eventually, [[Homo Sapiens]] surpasses other species on [[Earth]] due to this very focus on information and communication, notably with the development of [[Human Language]]. A fun to watch video on language and intelligence is [[School of Life]]'s [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQ33gAyhg2c) on the philosophy of [[Ludwig Wittgenstein]].
